.windsurf/workflows/openspec-proposal.md, before:

---
description: Scaffold a new OpenSpec change and validate strictly.
auto_execution_mode: 3
---
<!-- OPENSPEC:START -->
**Guardrails**
- Favor straightforward, minimal implementations first and add complexity only when it is requested or clearly required.
- Keep changes tightly scoped to the requested outcome.
- Refer to `openspec/AGENTS.md` (located inside the `openspec/` directory—run `ls openspec` or `openspec update` if you don't see it) if you need additional OpenSpec conventions or clarifications.
- Identify any vague or ambiguous details and ask the necessary follow-up questions before editing files.

**Steps**
1. Review `openspec/project.md`, run `openspec list` and `openspec list --specs`, and inspect related code or docs (e.g., via `rg`/`ls`) to ground the proposal in current behaviour; note any gaps that require clarification.
2. Choose a unique verb-led `change-id` and scaffold `proposal.md`, `tasks.md`, and `design.md` (when needed) under `openspec/changes/<id>/`.
3. Map the change into concrete capabilities or requirements, breaking multi-scope efforts into distinct spec deltas with clear relationships and sequencing.
4. Capture architectural reasoning in `design.md` when the solution spans multiple systems, introduces new patterns, or demands trade-off discussion before committing to specs.
5. Draft spec deltas in `changes/<id>/specs/<capability>/spec.md` (one folder per capability) using `## ADDED|MODIFIED|REMOVED Requirements` with at least one `#### Scenario:` per requirement and cross-reference related capabilities when relevant.
6. Draft `tasks.md` as an ordered list of small, verifiable work items that deliver user-visible progress, include validation (tests, tooling), and highlight dependencies or parallelizable work.
7. Validate with `openspec validate <id> --strict` and resolve every issue before sharing the proposal.

**Reference**
- Use `openspec show <id> --json --deltas-only` or `openspec show <spec> --type spec` to inspect details when validation fails.
- Search existing requirements with `rg -n "Requirement:|Scenario:" openspec/specs` before writing new ones.
- Explore the codebase with `rg <keyword>`, `ls`, or direct file reads so proposals align with current implementation realities.
<!-- OPENSPEC:END -->

Commit message:

feat: add Agent workflow files and clarify proposal stage guardrails (#65)
- Add openspec-apply.md workflow for implementing approved changes
- Add openspec-archive.md workflow for archiving deployed changes
- Add openspec-proposal.md workflow to .agent directory
- Add guardrail to proposal workflows preventing code implementation during design phase
- Remove extra blank lines from AGENTS.md formatting

.windsurf/workflows/openspec-proposal.md, after:

---
description: Scaffold a new OpenSpec change and validate strictly.
auto_execution_mode: 3
---
<!-- OPENSPEC:START -->
**Guardrails**
- Favor straightforward, minimal implementations first and add complexity only when it is requested or clearly required.
- Keep changes tightly scoped to the requested outcome.
- Refer to `openspec/AGENTS.md` (located inside the `openspec/` directory—run `ls openspec` or `openspec update` if you don't see it) if you need additional OpenSpec conventions or clarifications.
- Identify any vague or ambiguous details and ask the necessary follow-up questions before editing files.
- Do not write any code during the proposal stage. Only create design documents (proposal.md, tasks.md, design.md, and spec deltas). Implementation happens in the apply stage after approval.

**Steps**
1. Review `openspec/project.md`, run `openspec list` and `openspec list --specs`, and inspect related code or docs (e.g., via `rg`/`ls`) to ground the proposal in current behaviour; note any gaps that require clarification.
2. Choose a unique verb-led `change-id` and scaffold `proposal.md`, `tasks.md`, and `design.md` (when needed) under `openspec/changes/<id>/`.
3. Map the change into concrete capabilities or requirements, breaking multi-scope efforts into distinct spec deltas with clear relationships and sequencing.
4. Capture architectural reasoning in `design.md` when the solution spans multiple systems, introduces new patterns, or demands trade-off discussion before committing to specs.
5. Draft spec deltas in `changes/<id>/specs/<capability>/spec.md` (one folder per capability) using `## ADDED|MODIFIED|REMOVED Requirements` with at least one `#### Scenario:` per requirement and cross-reference related capabilities when relevant.
6. Draft `tasks.md` as an ordered list of small, verifiable work items that deliver user-visible progress, include validation (tests, tooling), and highlight dependencies or parallelizable work.
7. Validate with `openspec validate <id> --strict` and resolve every issue before sharing the proposal.

**Reference**
- Use `openspec show <id> --json --deltas-only` or `openspec show <spec> --type spec` to inspect details when validation fails.
- Search existing requirements with `rg -n "Requirement:|Scenario:" openspec/specs` before writing new ones.
- Explore the codebase with `rg <keyword>`, `ls`, or direct file reads so proposals align with current implementation realities.
<!-- OPENSPEC:END -->
